ONE-QUARTER IMPULSE.
CONSIDERABLE ACTIVITY
THERE APPEARS TO BE
AROUND TWO OF THE INNER PLANETS.
NUMEROUS SHIPS, ALL XINDI.
A LARGE ARRAY OF SATELLITES.
I'M PICKING UP
THEY'RE GENERATING
A DETECTION GRID.
DEGRA MENTIONED
A SECURITY NET.
SEEMS LIKE WE'VE COME
TO THE RIGHT PLACE.
THE PLANETOID WE PASSED
ON THE WAY IN --
-PUT US ON THE OTHER SIDE OF IT.
-AYE, SIR.
[ COMPUTER BEEPS ]
A CONVOY OF SHIPS IS APPROACHING
THE DETECTION GRID.
LET'S SEE THEM.
MAGNIFY THE LEAD SHIP.
SHOW ME THE WARP SIGNATURE.
DEGRA.
IT MAY SEEM ODD TO CELEBRATE
THE COMPLETION OF A WEAPON,
PARTICULARLY ONE DESIGNED
TO DESTROY
AN ENTIRE PLANET.
THE WORDS OF ENARCHIS,
BUT RECALL
INTO THE GREAT DIASPORA --
WRITTEN SOME 50 YEARS
WITHOUT A WORLD OF OUR OWN,
WE ARE BUT CHILDREN
LOST IN THE WILDERNESS.
ONE DAY WE'LL EMERGE
FROM THIS WILDERNESS,
AND OUR WORK HERE WILL ENSURE
THAT WE'LL NEVER BE LOST AGAIN.
TO A NEW ERA FOR ALL XINDI.
♪ IT'S BEEN A LONG ROAD ♪
♪ GETTING FROM THERE TO HERE ♪
♪ IT'S BEEN A LONG TIME ♪
♪ BUT MY TIME IS FINALLY NEAR ♪
♪ AND I WILL SEE MY DREAM
COME ALIVE AT LAST ♪
♪ I WILL TOUCH THE SKY ♪
♪ AND THEY'RE NOT GONNA
HOLD ME DOWN NO MORE ♪
♪ NO, THEY'RE NOT GONNA
CHANGE MY MIND ♪
♪ 'CAUSE I'VE GOT FAITH ♪
♪ OF THE HEART ♪
♪ I'M GOING WHERE MY HEART
WILL TAKE ME ♪
♪ I'VE GOT FAITH TO BELIEVE ♪
♪ I CAN DO ANYTHING ♪
♪ I'VE GOT STRENGTH
OF THE SOUL ♪
♪ AND NO ONE'S GONNA BEND
OR BREAK ME ♪
♪ I CAN REACH ANY STAR ♪
♪ I'VE GOT FAITH ♪
♪ I'VE GOT, I'VE GOT, I'VE GOT ♪
♪ FAITH OF THE HEART ♪
DEGRA, IT IS GOOD
TO SEE YOU AGAIN.
WELCOME.
WHEN CAN WE GET UNDERWAY?
MOMENTARILY. PATIENCE.
PATIENCE IS FOR THE DEAD.
YOU'VE ACCOMPLISHED A GREAT DEAL
IN A VERY SHORT TIME.
WE OWE YOU OUR GRATITUDE.
TO SPEAK OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS.
IT'S TOO EARLY
I'LL RESERVE MY GRATITUDE
HAVE BEEN ANNIHILATED.
FOR WHEN THE HUMANS
EVERY LINK IN THE GRID.
I'VE ANALYZED
A SINGLE WEAKNESS.
I CAN'T FIND
EXTREMELY SENSITIVE.
THE GRID IS
THE INSTANT WE PASS THROUGH.
WE'D BE DETECTED
WE COULD TRY DISABLING IT.
THOUSANDS OF SATELLITES.
IT UTILIZES
GOES OUT OF COMMISSION,
IF ONE OF THEM
IT FILLS THE GAP.
THE INSECTOID SHUTTLE?
WHAT ABOUT
MAKE LIKE ONE OF THE LOCALS?
WE COULD FLY IN,
TRY TO LOCATE WHERE THE WEAPON
IS BEING COMPLETED.
MIGHT BE ABLE TO GET
THEIR SHUTTLE
WITHOUT RAISING SUSPICION.
THROUGH THE GRID
EXPERTS AT PILOTING THAT THING.
CAPTAIN, WE'RE NOT EXACTLY
COUPLE HOURS TO GET UP TO SPEED.
IT'S GONNA TAKE AT LEAST A
TAKE THEM.
AS SOON AS WE CAN.
I WANT TO LAUNCH
[ ENGINE WHOOSHES ]
I THINK I FOUND REVERSE.
GREAT, BUT UNLESS WE PLAN
TO FLY IN ASS-FIRST,
HOW TO MAKE IT GO FORWARD.
WE'D BETTER FIGURE OUT
CAN'T ARGUE WITH THAT.
THESE CONSOLE SETTINGS AGAIN.
LET'S CYCLE THROUGH
UM, TRY THE PORT ACTUATOR.
HERE GOES.
[ COMPUTER BEEPING ]
[ CHITTERING ]
IS GOING TO NEED TIME
COMMANDER TUCKER
THE TRANSLATION MATRIX.
TO INSTALL
IF COMMANDER TUCKER WANTS
TO SPEAK INSECT,
I HAVE TO GET THIS RIGHT FIRST.
[ CHITTERING ]
THAT WAS "HAVE A NICE DAY,"
BELIEVE IT OR NOT,
OR ITS EQUIVALENT.
JUST GET IN THERE,
SCAN IT, AND GET OUT.
FIND THIS THING,
REMEMBER, WHATEVER INFORMATION
YOU GATHER
UNLESS YOU BRING IT BACK.
WON'T DO US ANY GOOD
WE'LL KEEP THAT IN MIND.
GOOD LUCK.
THANK YOU, SIR.
THANKS, CAPTAIN.
[ ALARM BEEPS ]
TROUBLE?
IT'S LIKE STEERING AN ASTEROID
RUNNER WITH A BAD AXIS COIL.
IS SOMEWHAT ERRATIC.
THEIR FLIGHT PATH
[ COMPUTER BEEPING ]
OPEN A CHANNEL.
TRIP?
[ GRUNTS ]
SORRY.
I'LL SEND YOU THE BILL.
NO PROBLEM.
I THINK I'M GETTING
A FEEL FOR HER.
SENSORS ARE UP AND RUNNING.
LET'S GET THIS SHOW
ON THE ROAD.
FOR AS LONG AS YOU CAN.
KEEP A SENSOR LOCK
500 METERS.
200.
HERE WE GO.
[ COMPUTER BEEPING ]
THROUGH THE GRID.
THEY'RE PASSING
WE'RE IN.
COMING UP FROM BEHIND.
XINDI PATROL SHIP
THEY'RE HAILING US.
[ COMPUTER BEEPS ]
[ CHITTERING ]
"WELCOME TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD."
DOESN'T EXACTLY SOUND LIKE
HOSHI, DON'T FAIL US NOW.
YOUR PRESENCE INSIDE
THE DETECTION GRID
IS UNAUTHORIZED.
EXPLAIN.
NAVIGATIONAL MALFUNCTION
WE HAD A SLIGHT
THAT THREW US OFF COURSE.
IT'S BEEN CORRECTED.
[ COMPUTER BEEPS ]
[ CHITTERING ]
YOUR CARRIER SHIP IMMEDIATELY.
RENDEZVOUS WITH
UNDERSTOOD.
THE DETECTION GRID IS CREATING
TOO MUCH INTERFERENCE.
I'VE LOST THEM.
[ COMPUTER BEEPING ]
WE'RE BEING SCANNED.
WHERE'S IT COMING FROM?
I'M NOT PICKING UP ANY VESSELS
IN THE VICINITY.
FROM THE MOON'S SURFACE.
A SMALL MONITORING STATION.
BROUGHT IT IN SCANNING RANGE.
THE MOON'S ROTATION
LET'S SEE IT.
MALCOLM?
THREE XINDI BIO-SIGNS.
I'M READING
HAVE THEY SENT OUT
A TRANSMISSION?
NOT YET.
WHAT ARE THEY WAITING FOR?
PROBABLY FOR THE MOON'S ROTATION
INTO COMMUNICATION RANGE.
TO BRING THEM BACK
HOW LONG?
FOUR HOURS.
TARGET THE FACILITY.
LOCK.
SIR.
WE CAN'T RISK IT.
FIRE.
TRACE KEMOCITE READINGS,
I'M STILL GETTING
BUT NOT ENOUGH TO INDICATE
A LARGE-SCALE WEAPON.
THERE'S NOT MUCH LAND
DOWN THERE.
DOESN'T HAVE ANY LIFE ON IT.
AND WHAT LAND THERE IS
TAKE US DOWN, TRAVIS.
CLOSER TO THE SURFACE.
ADJUST 20 DEGREES STARBOARD.
SEE SOMETHING?
I THINK SO.
YOU DID SAY THAT MOST
OF THIS THING'S POWER
STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY.
WAS ROUTED TO
AND YOU SAID WE COULD PROBABLY
FLY IT INSIDE A GAS GIANT.
HELL, IT'S ONLY WATER.
STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY'S HOLDING.
TAKE US DEEPER.
NEGATIVE Z-AXIS, 10 DEGREES.
THOSE SCANS, SIR?
ARE YOU GETTING
THERE'S A LOT OF ACTIVITY
AROUND THE RIGHT
LOWER HEMISPHERE.
I WANT TO HAVE A LOOK INSIDE.
GET IN AND GET OUT.
THE CAPTAIN SAID
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT
WE'RE GONNA DO.
AYE, AYE.
IT'S DEFINITELY IN THE FINAL
PHASES OF CONSTRUCTION.
MOST OF THE WORK THAT'S GOING ON
SEEMS MAINTENANCE-RELATED.
I'VE GONE OVER THE SCANS
YOU BROUGHT BACK.
THAT'S THE EXPLOSIVE MATRIX.
WE CAN SET OFF A CHAIN REACTION
IF WE CAN GET CLOSE ENOUGH,
THAT WILL BLOW THIS THING
TO HIGH HEAVEN.
THE INITIAL EXPLOSION WOULD NEED
TO BE OF CONSIDERABLE YIELD.
A COUPLE OF PHOTONIC TORPEDOES
SHOULD DO THE TRICK.
THERE'S ROOM IN THE SHUTTLE.
ABOUT A ONE-WAY TRIP.
WE'RE TALKING
I SHOULD BE THE ONE TO GO.
FORGET IT.
THAT CAN PILOT THAT SHUTTLE.
I'M THE ONLY ONE
I PRACTICED ON THOSE CONTROLS.
I CAN GET HER IN.
-BUT I'VE ACTUALLY DONE IT.
-CAPTAIN.
YOU WANT A SENIOR OFFICER
ON THIS, DON'T YOU?
I'LL BE FLYING THE MISSION.
CAPTAIN?
HOW SOON CAN YOU
GET IT READY?
THE TORPEDOES IN PLACE.
A COUPLE HOURS TO GET
GET STARTED.
MEET ME IN THE LAUNCH BAY
IN 30 MINUTES.
SOME FLYING LESSONS.
I'M GONNA NEED
AYE, SIR.
WELCOME ABOARD, CAPTAIN.
DANIELS.
WHERE AM I?
YOU'RE ON ENTERPRISE --
ENTERPRISE-J, TO BE EXACT,
A DISTANT RELATIVE OF YOUR SHIP.
WE'RE 400 YEARS
IN THE FUTURE.
[ WEAPONS FIRE ]
I'M GOING TO ASSUME YOU BROUGHT
ME HERE FOR A GOOD REASON.
LOOK OUT THERE.
IT EXTENDS 50,000 LIGHT-YEARS
IN ALL DIRECTIONS,
AND IT IS GROWING.
I'VE SEEN IT BEFORE.
I KNOW, IN THE EXPANSE.
THE ALIEN WE FOUND?
YOU KNOW ABOUT
THE TEST SUBJECT?
HE BELONGS TO THE SAME RACE
THAT BUILT THE SPHERES.
THEY'RE ALTERING THIS SPACE
TO MAKE IT HABITABLE
FOR THEIR SPECIES.
IT'S A PRELUDE TO INVASION.
WE CAME TO THE SAME CONCLUSION.
IT'S GETTING HARDER AND HARDER
TO SURPRISE YOU, CAPTAIN.
I'VE BROUGHT YOU TO A MONUMENTAL
EVENT IN HISTORY,
THE BATTLE OF PROCYON V,
ENGAGED THE SPHERE BUILDERS.
WHERE THE FEDERATION
YOU'VE MENTIONED THEM BEFORE.
THE FEDERATION?
ITHENITES, KLINGONS --
VULCANS, ANDORIANS,
DOZENS OF SPECIES,
INCLUDING HUMANS,
IN A POWERFUL ALLIANCE.
ALL UNIFIED
SPHERE BUILDERS.
WINS THE BATTLE.
THE FEDERATION
THEY DRIVE THE ENEMY BACK INTO
THEIR TRANS-DIMENSIONAL REALM.
IF THE FEDERATION HAD LOST,
THE SPHERE BUILDERS WOULD HAVE
SPREAD THROUGHOUT THE GALAXY.
WIPED OUT EVERYTHING.
THEY WOULD HAVE
THIS SPECIES HAS TECHNOLOGY
WHICH ALLOWS THEM TO EXAMINE
ALTERNATE TIMELINES.
THEY'VE SEEN THIS FUTURE,
CHANGE THE OUTCOME.
AND THEY WANT TO
SO THEY CONTACTED THE XINDI
AND CONVINCED THEM THAT HUMANITY
WAS A DANGEROUS THREAT.
THEY WANT THE XINDI
TO DESTROY US.
WITHOUT HUMANITY, THE FEDERATION
WILL NEVER EXIST.
THE XINDI UNDERSTAND
YOU HAVE TO MAKE
ISN'T THE ENEMY.
THAT HUMANITY
IN FACT, IT'S HUMANITY
THAT WILL PROTECT THEM
FROM THE SPHERE BUILDERS
WHEN THIS BATTLE IS WON.
CONTACT THEM. MAKE PEACE.
THEY'RE ABOUT TO DEPLOY
THEIR WEAPON.
I KNOW.
I CAN'T LET THAT HAPPEN.
IF YOU DESTROY THEIR WEAPON,
THEY WILL ONLY BUILD ANOTHER.
YOU ARE THE ONLY ONE
WHO CAN CONVINCE THEM
OF WHAT I HAVE TOLD YOU.
YOU DO NOT SACRIFICE YOURSELF.
IT IS CRUCIAL TO HISTORY THAT
WITH PREVENTING THE DEATHS
MY CONCERN IS
OF BILLIONS OF PEOPLE.
A PROBLEM FOR HISTORY,
IF THAT'S
WILL HAVE TO SUFFER.
THEN HISTORY
THEN SEND SOMEONE ELSE TO --
I WON'T DO THAT!
CAPTAIN, YOU HAVE TO BELIEVE ME.
A CATASTROPHIC MISTAKE.
YOU ARE MAKING
YOUR SHARE OF MISTAKES.
YOU'VE MADE
THIS ISN'T ONE OF THEM.
SEND ME BACK.
SEND ME BACK NOW!
TAKE THIS. IT'S XINDI.
A FAMILY MEDAL THAT BELONGS TO
ONE OF THE CREWMEN ON THIS SHIP.
THERE ARE XINDI SERVING
ABOARD ENTERPRISE-J.
WHY ARE YOU GIVING THIS TO ME?
IN CASE YOU CHANGE YOUR MIND.
I WON'T.
I'LL HAVE THIS QUANTUM-DATED.
IT'S FROM THE FUTURE.
WE BOTH KNOW
WHAT DO YOU INTEND TO DO?
WITH THE MISSION.
I'M GOING AHEAD
YOU DON'T THINK I SHOULD?
HE SAID YOU'RE THE ONLY ONE
WHO CAN END THE CONFLICT
WITH THE XINDI.
YOU CAN'T DO THAT
IF YOU'RE DEAD.
THAT'S IF YOU ACCEPT DANIELS'
VERSION OF THE FUTURE.
HE'S IN A POSITION TO KNOW.
I THOUGHT YOU WERE
THE SKEPTICAL ONE
WHEN IT CAME TO TIME TRAVEL.
OUR RECENT VISIT TO DETROIT
HAS TEMPERED MY SKEPTICISM.
YOU SHOULD RECONSIDER
YOUR DECISION.
WHAT AM I SUPPOSED TO DO?
FLY A SHUTTLE INTO THE SYSTEM
AND KNOCK ON THE DOOR?
WE WANT TO TALK?
TELL THE XINDI
THE WEAPON IS TOO CLOSE
TO BEING LAUNCHED.
IF THE SITUATION
WERE DIFFERENT,
MAYBE I'D CONSIDER IT,
BUT I CAN'T.
I DON'T WANT YOU TO DIE.
IT'S NOT NECESSARY.
I WISH THAT WERE TRUE.
TO ACCOMPANY THE WEAPON.
I WANT FOUR SHIPS
AN EXTREMELY LARGE VORTEX
WE'LL HAVE TO GENERATE
THAT MANY VESSELS.
TO ACCOMMODATE
EVEN AFTER EARTH IS DESTROYED,
THERE WILL BE RESIDUAL PRESENCE
IN THIS SYSTEM.
I INTEND TO HUNT DOWN
AND ERADICATE
EVERY REFUGEE CARAVAN,
EVERY COLONY,
EVERY LAST OUTPOST THEY HAVE.
WILL BE VERY UNSTABLE.
A VORTEX OF THAT SIZE
ONE OR MORE VESSELS.
YOU COULD LOSE
SEE THAT WE DON'T.
[ COMPUTER BEEPING ]
A MESSAGE FOR YOU.
GO AHEAD.
with one of the lunar outposts.
Commander, we've lost contact
-HOW LONG AGO?
-Two hours.
SEND A PATROL.
WE WILL RESUME THIS
WHEN I RETURN.
THAT DEALING WITH REPTILIANS
SOMEONE ONCE SAID
BARGAINING WITH THE SUN.
IS LIKE
AND YOU COME AWAY BURNED.
YOU MAKE NO PROGRESS,
IT'S NOT HIM.
THE LAST TIME I SAW YOU
LIKE THIS WAS
WHEN YOU DELIVERED
THE FIRST WEAPON.
THAT ONE ONLY KILLED 7 MILLION.
THIS ONE WILL DESTROY
AN ENTIRE WORLD.
BETTER THEIR WORLD THAN OURS.
THAT'S WHAT I KEEP
TELLING MYSELF.
A GOOD NUMBER OF THE DEAD
BUT THE REALITY IS
WILL BE INNOCENTS...
AND CHILDREN.
IT'S BEST NOT TO THINK ABOUT IT.
IT'S DIFFICULT WHEN YOU HAVE
CHILDREN OF YOUR OWN.
WHAT WE DO IS FOR THEM,
FOR OUR CHILDREN'S FUTURE.
REMEMBER THAT.
THEY'LL REMEMBER US.
I WONDER HOW
AREN'T EXACTLY INTUITIVE.
I KNOW THESE CONTROLS
I THINK THEY WERE BUILT FOR
SOMEONE WITH COMPOUND EYES.
TRY AGAIN.
[ SIGHS ]
GOOD. YOU'RE STARTING TO THINK
LIKE AN INSECTOID.
AS A COMPLIMENT.
I'LL TAKE THAT
CAN I ASK YOU SOMETHING?
GO AHEAD.
EXPENDABLE MAN ON ENTERPRISE.
YOU'RE THE LEAST
WHY ARE YOU DOING THIS?
AN HOUR AGO, I GAVE THE COMMAND
TO KILL THREE XINDI
IN COLD BLOOD.
A MONTH AGO, I HAD PHLOX
CREATE A LIVING BEING
SOME OF ITS TISSUE,
IN ORDER TO USE
AND I WATCHED HIM
PUT IT TO DEATH.
THIS IS SOME SORT OF PENANCE.
SOUNDS LIKE YOU'RE SAYING
I'M SAYING I WON'T ORDER
ANYONE ELSE TO DIE.
I HATE TO ADD TO THIS MENAGERIE
OF YOURS, DOC.
NONSENSE.
WHAT'S, UH, ONE MORE MOUTH
TO FEED?
JUST DON'T HARVEST
ANY PART OF HIM.
WOULD BE NECESSARY.
OH...I DOUBT THAT
OH, DO ME A FAVOR.
SLIP HIM A PIECE OF CHEESE
EVERY NOW AND THEN.
CERTAINLY.
I'VE ALWAYS BEEN MUCH BETTER
AT AVOIDING FAREWELLS
THAN GIVING THEM,
SO I'M NOT EVEN GONNA TRY.
BUT I'M GOING TO ASK ALL OF YOU
TO THINK BACK
TO THE DAY WHEN THIS SHIP
WAS FIRST LAUNCHED.
WE WERE EXPLORERS THEN.
WHEN ALL THIS IS OVER,
WHEN EARTH IS SAFE,
I WANT YOU TO GET BACK
TO THAT JOB.
THERE ARE 400 BILLION STARS
IN OUR GALAXY.
WE'VE ONLY EXPLORED
A TINY FRACTION.
YOU HAVE A LOT OF WORK TO DO.
WHO WILL SIT IN THIS CHAIR,
OF ALL THE CAPTAINS
I CAN'T IMAGINE ANY OF THEM
BEING MORE PROUD
THAN I AM RIGHT NOW.
Archer to Enterprise.
I'm heading in.
400 METERS.
200.
HE'S PASSING THROUGH THE GRID.
HE'S IN.
GIVE THEM HELL, CAPTAIN.
I'LL BE IN THE READY ROOM.
[ SOBBING ]
[ COMPUTER BEEPING ]
[ CHITTERING ]
POWER DOWN IMMEDIATELY.
UNAUTHORIZED VESSEL,
[ DOOR CHIMES ]
COME IN.
[ SIGHS ]
STILL NOTHING.
I'M AWARE OF THAT.
IT'S BEEN OVER TWO HOURS.
HE SHOULD HAVE REACHED
THE WEAPON BY NOW.
TRAVIS AND I GOT THERE
IN 25 MINUTES,
AND WE DIDN'T KNOW
WHERE TO LOOK.
YOU THINK IT'S POSSIBLE
OUR SENSORS
MISSED THE EXPLOSION?
COULD HAVE
DOUBTFUL.
WHATEVER YOU'RE DOING,
CAN'T IT WAIT?
FOR WHAT?
YOUR PLACE IS ON THE BRIDGE.
RIGHT NOW...
IF MY PRESENCE IS NEEDED.
I'LL BE NOTIFIED
NO MATTER WHAT HAPPENS
TO THE XINDI WEAPON,
THE CAPTAIN ISN'T COMING BACK.
YOU'RE IN COMMAND NOW.
YOU'RE ON TOP OF THINGS,
THE CREW NEEDS TO KNOW
IF YOU'RE HOLED UP IN HERE.
AND IT DOESN'T HELP
ANY LEADERSHIP ADVICE.
I DON'T NEED
I'M JUST TRYING TO HELP.
THIS ISN'T EASY
FOR ANY OF US.
T'POL?
DISMISSED.
DISMISSED?
GET OUT.
[ DOOR OPENS, CLOSES ]
ANSWER THE QUESTION!
AAH. REPEAT THE QUESTION.
HAVE ENTERED THE EXPANSE?
HOW MANY EARTH VESSELS
I WISH I COULD HELP YOU.
[ SPITS ]
THE DARK ABOUT THESE THINGS.
BUT MY SUPERIORS KEEP ME IN
UGH!
IS THIS A PREEMPTIVE STRIKE?
WAS YOUR SPECIALTY.
I THOUGHT THAT
YOU DON'T WANT TO KNOW
MY SPECIALTY.
LET ME GUESS.
STINKING UP THE ROOM?
I HAD NO IDEA THAT HUMANS
WERE SO RESILIENT.
IN MOST PRIMATE SPECIES.
IT'S NOT A TRAIT FOUND
INCLUDING THE XINDI?
THERE'S A REASON REPTILIANS
ARE CALLED UPON
WHEN FORCE MUST BE APPLIED.
WHO PILOTED THE WEAPON
IT WAS A REPTILIAN
THAT ATTACKED YOUR WORLD.
FRIEND OF YOURS?
HE WAS FROM MY REGIMENT.
I SELECTED HIM MYSELF.
YOU MUST BE VERY PROUD.
HIS NAME WILL GO
DOWN IN HISTORY.
SPOKEN WITH REVERENCE,
IT WILL BE
A TESTAMENT TO THE SUPERIORITY
OF THE COLD-BLOODED.
DIDN'T KNOW THIS,
I'LL BET YOU
MY WORLD WAS RULED BY REPTILES.
BUT AT ONE TIME, MOST OF
I WASN'T AWARE OF THAT.
65 MILLION YEARS AGO,
A COMET HIT AROUND
CAUSED A MASS EXTINCTION.
MOST OF THE REPTILES DIED OUT.
THE DOMINANT SPECIES.
MAMMALS BECAME
HOW UNFORTUNATE.
STILL, THE REPTILES MIGHT HAVE
COME OUT ON TOP
FOR A SLIGHT DISADVANTAGE.
IF IT HADN'T BEEN
AND WHAT WAS THAT?
THE SIZE OF A WALNUT.
THEY HAD BRAINS
THAT'S VERY SMALL.
APPARENTLY IT'S A CONSTANT
IN THE UNIVERSE.
EARTH VESSELS -- HOW MANY?
DIDN'T ALL DIE OUT.
THE REPTILES
SOME EVOLVED INTO SNAKES,
ALLIGATORS, TURTLES.
AS A MATTER OF FACT,
ONE OF MY FAVORITE RESTAURANTS
IN SAN FRANCISCO
MAKES THE MOST WONDERFUL
TURTLE SOUP.
YOU SHOULD TRY IT SOMETIME
IF YOU'RE EVER IN THE AREA.
[ GRUNTS ]
YOU WANT ME TO KILL YOU?
JUST MAKING CONVERSATION.
INTERESTING FACTS
RELAYING A FEW
YOU'RE TRYING TO DESTROY.
ABOUT THE WORLD
AN INTERESTING FACT OF MY OWN.
I'LL RECIPROCATE WITH
UGH!
WHERE YOUR SHIP IS.
WE KNOW EXACTLY
THAT SO?
WITH OUR LUNAR OUTPOST,
WHEN WE LOST CONTACT
WE SCANNED THE VICINITY
AND DISCOVERED IT...HIDING.
EXACTLY WHAT I WANT TO KNOW,
UNLESS YOU TELL ME
I'LL DISPATCH A SQUADRON
RIGHT NOW.
[ GRUNTING ]
AH. NO MORE CONVERSATION?
HMM?
TO SAY GOODBYE TO YOUR CREW.
I HOPE YOU HAD A CHANCE
ALL RIGHT.
BUT I'LL ONLY TALK TO DEGRA.
DEGRA?
ALONE.
I DON'T KNOW WHO THAT IS.
HE'S BUILDING YOUR WEAPON.
RING A BELL NOW?
WHAT MAKES YOU THINK DEGRA
WOULD BE INTERESTED
IN TALKING TO YOU?
JUST TELL HIM
THE NAME OF HIS THIRD CHILD,
TRENIA.
DEGRA HAS ONLY TWO CHILDREN.
PROVE ME WRONG.
TELL HIM.
SENSORS WOULD HAVE
EASILY DETECTED
AN EXPLOSION OF THAT MAGNITUDE,
EVEN UNDERWATER.
GET AS CLOSE AS WE CAN,
I SAY WE GO IN,
AND TRY TO TAKE OUT THE WEAPON.
AGREED.
IS HEAVILY GUARDED.
THIS SYSTEM
THE WEAPON ARE NONEXISTENT.
OUR CHANCES OF REACHING
WE CAN'T JUST SIT HERE.
WHAT DO YOU PROPOSE WE DO?
THE CAPTAIN MAY SUCCEED.
THERE'S STILL A CHANCE
THE LONGER WE WAIT HERE,
THE GREATER THE LIKELIHOOD
WE'LL BE SPOTTED.
THE CAPTAIN IN ONE HOUR,
IF WE DON'T HEAR FROM
A SHUTTLEPOD INTO THE SYSTEM.
I'LL PILOT
-AND DO WHAT?
-[ SCOFFS ]
ATTEMPT A DIPLOMATIC SOLUTION.
YOU'VE GOT TO BE KIDDING.
YOU CAN'T POSSIBLY BELIEVE THAT
THAT HAS ANY CHANCE OF SUCCESS.
BUT THE FACT THAT I'M VULCAN
THE ODDS AREN'T PROMISING,
ESTABLISH A DIALOGUE.
MAY HELP ME
CAPTURED OR KILLED.
YOU'LL JUST BE
PERHAPS.
BUT AT THE MOMENT, I DON'T SEE
AN ALTERNATE COURSE OF ACTION.
HELLO AGAIN.
HOW DO YOU KNOW ME?
LONG STORY.
REPEAT WHAT YOU TOLD HIM.
THE NAME OF YOUR THIRD CHILD
IS TRENIA.
LEAVE ME ALONE WITH HIM.
AND TAKE HIM, AS WELL.
[ DOOR OPENS, CLOSES ]
INTO THE PREGNANCY,
THREE MONTHS
YOUR WIFE CONTRACTED
ANAPROLEAN FEVER.
YOU LOST THE CHILD.
TO NAME IT TRENIA.
YOU WERE GOING
I'VE NEVER TOLD
THAT TO ANYONE.
YOU TOLD IT TO ME.
THE WEAPON YOU DESIGNED,
YOU ALSO TALKED ABOUT
THE ONE THAT KILLED
7 MILLION PEOPLE.
THE TELEMETRY COME IN,
WHEN YOU WATCHED
YOU WONDERED HOW MANY OF THOSE
7 MILLION WERE CHILDREN.
WHO ARE YOU?
IT DOESN'T MATTER WHO I AM
OR HOW I KNOW ALL THIS.
WHAT'S IMPORTANT IS THAT YOU
LISTEN TO WHAT I HAVE TO SAY.
CONTINUE.
[ SIGHS ]
THIS WEAPON IS BASED ON A LIE.
YOUR REASON FOR BUILDING
WHAT LIE WOULD THAT BE?
THAT AT SOME POINT
IN THE FUTURE,
DESTROY YOUR SPECIES.
HUMANS ARE GOING TO
THAT IS NOT A LIE!
YOU KNOW ABOUT THE SPHERES?
OF COURSE.
BY TRANS-DIMENSIONAL BEINGS.
THEY WERE CONSTRUCTED
RECONFIGURE THE EXPANSE
THEIR PURPOSE IS TO
TO MAKE IT HABITABLE
FOR THEIR SPECIES.
THE XINDI, NOT HUMANITY.
THAT'S WHAT DESTROYS
I'VE STUDIED THE SPHERES.
THERE IS NO EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT
WHAT YOU'RE SAYING.
I'VE SEEN IT HAPPEN.
I'VE BEEN TO THE FUTURE,
400 YEARS INTO THE FUTURE.
YOU EXPECT ME TO BELIEVE THAT?
THERE'S AN ARTIFACT
IN MY RIGHT POCKET.
TAKE IT.
GO AHEAD.
AN INITIATION MEDAL.
THE RESULTS WILL BACK ME UP.
HAVE IT QUANTUM-DATED.
GOTTEN IT ANYWHERE.
YOU COULD HAVE
YOU SON OF A BITCH.
LISTEN TO ME,
IT WASN'T ANY EASIER FOR ME TO
SWALLOW THIS THAN IT IS FOR YOU,
UNDERSTAND SOMETHING.
BUT YOU BETTER
IF YOU DESTROY EARTH,
ELIMINATING MY SPECIES,
YOU WON'T JUST BE
YOU'LL BE ELIMINATING
YOUR OWN.
THE QUANTUM-DATING
CONFIRMS IT.
IT'S FROM THE FUTURE.
THAT DOESN'T PROVE THE HUMAN'S
TELLING THE TRUTH.
IF THERE'S ANY TRUTH
IN WHAT HE'S SAYING,
IT MEANS WE CAN'T TRUST HER.
SHE'S BEEN DEALING
IT ALSO MEANS
WITH THE REPTILIANS SECRETLY.
ARCHER TOLD YOU THIS?
HE SAID HE SAW REPTILIANS
ON EARTH,
IN A PLACE CALLED DETROIT,
OVER 100 YEARS IN THE PAST.
THE PAST?
SO NOW HE'S A TIME TRAVELER?
ACCORDING TO THE HUMAN, THEY
WERE DEVELOPING A BIO-WEAPON.
THE COUNCIL PROHIBITED THAT.
IN GREAT DETAIL.
HE SPOKE OF IT
IF THE REPTILIANS WANTED TO KEEP
THEIR ACTIONS A SECRET,
A GOOD PLACE TO DO IT.
THE PAST WOULD BE
GET TO THE PAST?
HOW WOULD THEY
SHE MAY HAVE TAKEN THEM.
WE HAVE TO INVESTIGATE THIS.
AND QUICKLY.
THE WEAPON'S BEEN MOVED
TO A SAFE LOCATION,
BUT IT'S NEARLY READY
TO BE DEPLOYED.
THE COUNCIL MUST BE INFORMED.
REPTILIANS SIT ON THE COUNCIL,
OR HAVE YOU FORGOTTEN?
BEHIND OUR BACKS,
IF THEY DID GO
WHAT WE'VE LEARNED, NOT YET.
WE SHOULDN'T REVEAL
WHAT ABOUT THE AQUATICS?
WE CAN INFORM THEM IN SECRET.
ALL OF THIS COLLUSION
IS DANGEROUS.
THE COUNCIL IS FRACTURING.
WHO THE REAL ENEMY IS.
WE CAN'T FORGET
WE MAY NOT KNOW
WHAT HAPPENS IF YOU FAIL?
TO JUST KEEP SENDING PEOPLE IN
ARE WE SUPPOSED
TILL THERE'S NO ONE LEFT?
THAT'S HARDLY A VIABLE OPTION.
ONE MORE SHUTTLEPOD.
WE ONLY HAVE
YOU'RE MISSING MY POINT.
I DON'T THINK YOU'RE DOING
THIS TO MAKE PEACE.
I THINK YOU WANT TO TRY
AND SAVE THE CAPTAIN.
YOU'RE WRONG.
WHY DO I GET THE FEELING YOU
HAVEN'T THOUGHT THIS THROUGH?
YOUR OBJECTIONS CLEAR.
YOU HAVE MADE
NOW RETURN TO THE BRIDGE.
AND WATCH YOU FLY OFF AND DIE.
I'M NOT JUST GONNA SIT STILL
-I GAVE YOU AN ORDER.
-T'POL.
LET GO OF ME!
-I WON'T LET YOU DO THIS.
-I SAID LET GO!
WHAT THE HELL'S
WRONG WITH YOU?
Bridge to T'Pol.
GO AHEAD.
to go to the Xindi.
There's no need
they're coming to us.
It appears
FOUR XINDI VESSELS CLOSING FAST.
HAIL THEM.
[ COMPUTER BEEPING ]
NO RESPONSE.
THEY'RE CHARGING WEAPONS.
ARE YOU PROPOSING?
WHAT EXACTLY
THAT WE TRUST EACH OTHER.
BEHIND THE CONTROLS
YOU WERE CAPTURED
WITH EXPLOSIVES.
OF A SHIP ARMED
YOU'RE ASKING FOR OUR TRUST?
THAT COULD DESTROY MY WORLD.
YOU'RE BUILDING A WEAPON
I HAD TO TRY AND STOP YOU.
YOUR MISSION HAS FAILED,
AND NOW THAT
YOU WANT TO NEGOTIATE.
JUST CONSIDER WHAT I SAID.
BY DESTROYING YOUR WORLD,
YOU MAINTAIN THAT
OUR OWN ANNIHILATION.
WE'LL BE ENSURING
THAT'S RIGHT.
BECAUSE IT'S HUMANKIND
THAT ULTIMATELY
SAVES THE XINDI
FROM THESE SPHERE BUILDERS.
WE'RE BOTH FIGHTING
THE WRONG ENEMY.
I'M AFRAID IT'LL TAKE MORE
THAN THIS ANTIQUE
TO CONVINCE US.
QUANTUM-DATING HAS PRODUCED
INACCURATE RESULTS BEFORE.
DO YOU BELIEVE THESE RESULTS
ARE INACCURATE?
THIS COUNCIL OF YOURS,
LET ME SPEAK TO
PRESENT MY CASE.
SOME MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL
WOULD SOONER EXECUTE YOU
THAN LISTEN.
CHANGE THEIR MINDS.
THEN HELP ME
YOU HAVEN'T CHANGED OURS.
I'VE MADE AN IMPRESSION,
OR YOU WOULDN'T
STILL BE HERE.
UGH!
WE'VE LOST HULL PLATING!
I STILL DON'T HAVE
HELM CONTROL.
T'POL TO ENGINEERING.
[ INDISTINCT SHOUTING ]
AAH!
ENGINEERING REPORT.
THAT LAST HIT TOOK OUT
THE STARBOARD NACELLE!
WE'RE DEAD IN THE WATER.
BRIDGE!
UGH!
COM'S DOWN.
GET IT BACK.
UGH!
OHH!
RESTRAIN HIM.
WE'RE NOT FINISHED.
YOU'VE HAD ENOUGH TIME.
THE LOCATION OF HIS FORCES?
HAS HE REVEALED
DISCUSSING OTHER MATTERS.
WE'VE BEEN
THERE ARE NO OTHER MATTERS.
TAKE THEM BACK
TO THEIR SHIP.
WE'RE NOT GOING ANYWHERE.
YOU CAN'T THREATEN US.
RETURN TO YOUR SHIP.
WHAT ABOUT HIM?
HE'S GOING TO A DETENTION CENTER
FOR MORE QUESTIONING.
FROM HIS SHIP, THEY'LL JOIN HIM.
IF THERE ARE ANY SURVIVORS
SURVIVORS?
YOUR SHIP'S UNDER ATTACK.
YOU AGREED TO HOLD OFF!
WE GREW TIRED OF WAITING.
CALL OFF YOUR VESSELS.
I DON'T ANSWER TO YOU.
I'LL ASSEMBLE THE COUNCIL.
THE EARTH SHIP WILL BE DUST.
BY THE TIME YOU DO,
WE'VE GOT HULL BREACHES
ON "C," "D," AND "E."
CLOSE THEM OFF.
AREN'T RESPONDING!
THE BULKHEADS
WE'RE VENTING ATMOSPHERE!
[ INDISTINCT SHOUTING ]
AAH!
GET HIM TO SICKBAY!
YES, SIR!
TUCKER TO THE BRIDGE!
IF YOU CAN HEAR ME,
I'VE GOT COOLANT LEAKS
ALL OVER THE PLACE.
WE'RE EVACUATING.
[ WHIRRING ]
EVERYBODY OUT!
[ INDISTINCT SHOUTING ]
AAH!